Aerosol  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Aerosol 
S.No. 
Product Name 
Spatial Resolution 
Temporal Resolution 
1 
3DIMG_L2G_AOD 
0.10X0.10 degree 
30 minutes 
Aerosol  
Aerosol  
10.     Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) Reterival  
10.1 
Algorithm Configuration Information 
10.1.1 Algorithm Name  
Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD)  
10.1.2 Algorithm Identifier 
3DIMG_L2G_AOD 
10.1.3 Algorithm Specification 
Version Date 
Prepared  by 
Description 
1.0  
14.02.2007 
Prakash Chauhan 
AOD Baseline Document (Version-1) 
1.1 
17.08.2012 
Prakash Chauhan 
Nivedita Sanwlani 
Arvind Sahay 
AOD Baseline Document (Version-2) 
1.2 
01.01.2021 
Manoj K Mishra 
AOD Baseline Document (Version-3) 
 
10.2 Introduction 
10.2.1 Overview and background 
Aerosols play an important role in numerous aspects of human life. Aerosols have large-
scale effects, such as their impact on climate by redistributing solar radiation (Herman 
and Browning 1975; Charlson et al. 1991; Haywood and Boucher 2000) and interacting 
with clouds (Platnick and Twomey 1994; Kaufman et al. 2002). Aerosol information is 
also critical for atmospheric correction algorithms for multi-spectral satellite sensors and 
military operations. The climate effects of atmospheric aerosols may be comparable to 
CO2 greenhouse effects, but with opposite sign and larger uncertainty (Hansen and Lacis, 
1990). Aerosols have a significant impact on human life beyond the climate element. 
When in the lower troposphere, aerosols cause poor air quality, reduction of visibility, 
and public health hazards. Satellite remote sensing provides a means to derive aerosol 
distribution at global and regional scales.  
This Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document (ATBD) describes the updated algorithm 
used to retrieve the Aerosol Optical Thickness (AOD) for the INSAT-3D/3DR Imager 
instrument operating from a geostationary platform. In comparison to previous algorithm 
(see INSAT-3D AOD ATBD version-1&2), the present algorithm (version-3, Mishra et 
al, 2018) is significantly different both in terms of surface reflectance characterization as 
well as aerosol inversion. The updated algorithm has several advancement, which has 
improved the AOD product. Following points are some of the important features of the 
present algorithm that makes it advanced and improved in comparison to previous 
versions: 
a) Previous algorithm utilizes single scattering approximation (SSA) that is it do not 
consider multiple scattering, while in present algorithm exact radiative transfer 
calculation are done considering multiple scattering events also. 
Aerosol  
b) In previous versions, minimization of 30-day top of the atmosphere (TOA) radiance is 
assumed as surface contribution, while here minimization of Rayleigh corrected TOA 
reflectance is used for generating clear composite image (CCI). 
c) In previous version CCI image is directly used as surface reflectance, while in present 
algorithm CCI image is first atmospherically corrected using dynamic (seasonal and 
spatial) background aerosol database (generated using multiyear MODIS aqua AOD data) 
to generate surface reflectance which is then used for AOD inversion. 
d) Previously perfectly scattering aerosol type is assumed for both ocean and land (for 
land it is rarely valid), while in updated algorithm for AOD inversion continental and 
marine aerosols are used for land and ocean, respectively. 
e) In previous versions, AOD retrieval done for all pixel even over bright surface where 
in principle retrieval is not possible using band centered at red (650nm) wavelength, 
while in current version AOD retrieval is done only for those pixel where surface 
reflectance is less than critical reflectance. Thus, false retrievals such as AOD retrieval 
over very bright surface (like desert or bare arid soil surfaces or high reflecting urban 
setups) are reduced/masked. 
f) Current algorithm gives AOD product at 550 nm. 
The output product description is summarized in Table 1. Specifically, this document 
identifies the sources of input data, both INSAT-3D/3DR imager and non- INSAT-
3D/3DR imager data, required for retrieval; provides the physical theory and 
mathematical background underlying the use of this information in the retrievals; 
includes implementation details; and describes assumptions and limitations of the 
proposed approach.  
 
Table 1: Summary of Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) product 
Parameter 
Name  
Units  
Horizontal Cell 
Size  
Comments  
Aerosol Optical 
depth at 550 nm  
Dimensionless  10.0 km for both 
Land and oceans  
Retrieved for all cloud free 
regions.  
 
 
10.2.2 Objective 
The objective of this algorithm is to calculate the aerosol optical thickness, proportional 
to the total aerosol loading of the ambient aerosol, over both land and ocean for Indian 
region on a six times (6:00, 6:30, 7:00, 7:30, 8:00 and 8:30 UTC) daily basis. Retrievals 
are only performed for cloud free pixels during the daytime. The overall objectives of the 
INSAT-3D/3DR aerosol retrievals algorithm is to determine the aerosol optical thickness, 
at 550 nm and 10 km spatial resolution over both land and ocean surfaces with root mean 
square (RMS) error of ±0.20. Optical thickness retrievals apply only under clear and 
daytime conditions. 
 
 
Aerosol  
10.3 Inputs 
10.3.1 Static Data  
Parameter 
Resolution 
Source 
Digital elevation model (DEM) 
 
Relative Humidity climatology 
(monthly) 
5.0 minutes 
 
0.5 degree 
ETOPO5 
 
NCEP 
Spectral 
Response 
Function 
(SRF) for Imager bands 
1nm 
Sensor Group of Space 
Applications Centre, Ahmedabad 
 
   
10.3.2 Image and preprocessing data (Dynamic) 
 
Parameter 
Resolution Quantization 
Accuracy 
Source 
Radiometric 
and 
geometric corrected 
radiance values of 
visible 
channel 
(0.55-0.75 µm) 
4 km 
10 bit 
---- 
Derived from 
raw data by DP 
(data 
processing) 
Radiometric 
and 
geometric corrected 
BT values of TIR-1 
channel  
4 km 
10 bit 
---- 
Derived from 
raw data by DP 
(data 
processing) 
Radiometric 
and 
geometric corrected 
BT values of TIR-2 
channel 
4 km 
10 bit 
---- 
Derived from 
raw data by DP 
(data 
processing) 
Geolocation 
file 
along 
with 
sun 
zenith & azimuth 
and sensor zenith 
and 
azimuth 
information 
All pixels 
--- 
Not greater 
than 1 pixel 
Derived from 
raw data by DP 
(data 
processing) 
At 
least 
28-day 
previous 
data 
for 
Visible band should 
be available for 1130 
and 0830 hrs. UTC 
for the generation of 
Clear 
composite 
reflectance image 
4 km 
--- 
--- 
Derived from 
raw data by DP 
(data 
processing) 
 
10.3.3 Other Auxiliary data and Model Inputs 
Parameter 
Resolution 
Quantization 
Accuracy 
Source 
Total Column 
Ozone 
 
50 km  
        
-- 
 
-- 
NCEP  
 
Aerosol  
concentration  
 
 
Surface 
pressure  
 
 
50 km  
 
-- 
 
-- 
NCEP or 
GTS through 
IMD 
10.4 Algorithm Functional Specifications 
 
10.4.1 Overview 
It has been demonstrated that aerosol optical thickness can be retrieved from solar-
reflected radiance, and that aerosol size distribution information is carried in the spectral 
dependence of aerosol optical thickness (e.g., Kaufman et al., 1997; Kaufman et al., 
2002). Thus, satellite reflectance measurement limited to one (GOES) or two channels 
(Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer [AVHRR]) were used first to derive the 
total aerosol content by assuming a given aerosol model.  
The relatively homogeneous surface of the ocean enables the direct application of the 
look up table (LUT) approach to find the aerosol optical thickness. Using the observed 
reflectance at the top of the atmosphere (TOA) in coordination with ancillary information 
on the wind speed, water vapor, surface pressure, surface elevation, and ozone, the 
corrected reflectances are inverted into a maritime LUT to find values of optical 
thickness. 
The approach over land is more complicated, in that dark, vegetated surfaces are required 
for aerosol optical depth retrieval. In dark vegetation approach for aerosol retrieval a 
near-IR band is used to identify dark, vegetated pixels, then the surface reflectance in the 
visible bands is calculated from the observed reflectance in the near-IR band. The optical 
thickness is initially calculated assuming a continental aerosol model. The suspended 
matter information is used to choose a better aerosol model and more accurate values of 
optical thickness (Kaufmann et al. 1997). 
In spite of advances in aerosol remote sensing over land, most retrievals are limited to 
once or twice per day, as by the morning and afternoon passes of the orbiting polar 
satellites. Aerosols, however, show diurnal variations that would be missed by such 
sparse observations. While studies of aerosol optical depth from Sun photometers show 
little systematic trends (Smirnov et al. 2002), surface observations of scattering show 
significant diurnal patterns (Bergin et al. 2001). It is required to understand aerosol plume 
movement to track and forecast plume movement in the interest of human health. 
Therefore, it is important to monitor the temporal aspects of aerosol. 
The INSAT-3DR imager data from geostationary platform has the potential to provide 
aerosol observations over land and ocean with multiple observations per day.  Many 
studies have demonstrated the potential of Geostationary Operational Environmental 
Satellite (GOES) series of imager sensors to provide quantitative estimates of aerosol 
optical (Knapp et al. 2002, Knapp et al. 2005). Their sensitivity studies, however, 
concluded that retrievals depend on aerosol optical property assumptions and surface 
reflectance. Studies using newer geostationary satellites (e.g. GOES-8) and larger 
validation networks (e.g. Aerosol Robotic Network—AERONET) supported those initial 
Aerosol  
findings. Specifically, Zhang et al. (2001) and Knapp et al. (2002) showed that aerosol 
monitoring from GOES is possible for South America. However, this region has optimal 
retrieval conditions: surface cover with little variability (i.e. rainforest) and large aerosol 
optical depths (from biomass burning). 
Studies by Knapp et al. (2005) have shown operational potential of GOES series of 
sensors for the monitoring of aerosol optical depth over land. A method is proposed by 
Knapp et al (2005) to correct surface effects and retrieve aerosol optical depth using 
visible reflectance measurements from the Geostationary Operational Environmental 
Satellite (GOES). The surface contribution is determined from temporal compositing of 
visible imagery, where darker pixels correspond to less atmospheric attenuation and 
surface reflectance is deduced from the composite using radiative transfer. The method is 
applied to GOES-8 imagery over the eastern US. Retrieved surface reflectance is 
compared with separate retrievals using a priori ground based observations of aerosol 
optical depth. 
10.4.1.1 
Theoretical Background 
The INSAT-3DR imager data will be used to perform the surface reflectance and aerosol 
optical depth retrievals and mask for clouds. It measures top of the atmosphere (TOA) 
radiance in six channels: three at infrared wavelengths, one in the visible wavelength and 
one sensitive to both solar and Earth-emitted radiance. Primarily, the visible channel 
(0.52–0.72 mm full width at half maximum) is sensitive to aerosol scattering and 
remaining channels are used for cloud masking. The cloud mask algorithm is based on 
the Clouds from the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) (CLAVR) 
algorithm (Stowe et al. 1999) which uses spectral and spatial thresholds to test for the 
presence of clouds. 
The retrieval of aerosol information from INSAT-3DR imager data is a 3-step process: 
1)  Cloud masking  
2) Composite the visible images to estimate the surface reflectance, and 
3) Use the surface reflectance with an image to retrieve the aerosol optical depth.   
These steps are described below. 
 
Cloud Masking of INSAT-3DR Imager data  
Clouds are generally characterized by higher reflectance and lower temperature than the 
underlying earth surface. As such, simple visible and infrared window threshold 
approaches offer considerable skill in cloud detection. Following threshold-based tests 
will be performed to detect the cloudy pixels.  
a) Visible band threshold test  
The reflectance threshold test using visible band of INSTA-3D/3DR. Pixels with visible 
channel reflectance greater than 0.3 over land and greater than 0.10 over ocean are 
considered cloudy. 
b) TIR Brightness temperature threshold test 
Aerosol  
 Pixels with brightness temperature in TIR1 channel less than 273 are considered cloudy.  
c) Standard deviation threshold test 
Land: 3X3 pixel window is considered for calculating standard deviation in visible and 
TIR1 channel. If standard deviation of visible channel and TIR1 BT is greater than 0.03 
and 4, respectively than all pixels in 3X3 window are masked. 
Ocean: 3X3 pixel window is considered for calculating standard deviation in visible and 
TIR1 channel. If standard deviation of visible channel and TIR1 BT is greater than 0.015 
and 1, respectively, than all pixels in 3X3 window are masked. 
 
Surface Reflectance Retrieval 
Estimating the surface contribution to the TOA INSAT-3D/3DR Imager visible 
reflectance is difficult since observations will have atmospheric contamination. For 
instance, a visible observation from INSAT-3DR Imager on a cloudless day with low 
aerosol burden will still have gaseous absorption (primarily, ozone and water vapour); 
Rayleigh scattering; and residual aerosol extinction. This atmospheric component to the 
TOA reflectance needs to be removed to retrieve the surface reflectance. While studies 
have shown it is possible to estimate the surface component from observations in the near 
infrared (e.g. 2.1 µm) where aerosol and Rayleigh scattering are very low (Kaufman et al. 
2002), the INSAT-3D/3DR imager lacks an observation at this wavelength. Therefore, a 
compositing method will be used to estimate the surface reflectance. 
The INSAT-3D/3DR visible channel radiance is converted to top of the atmosphere 
(TOA) reflectance. TOA reflectance is then corrected for ozone and water Vapor 
absorption. Water vapour and ozone concentration are used from NCEP model data. 
Further Rayleigh reflectance is removed from the gaseous absorption corrected TOA 
reflectance to get Rayleigh corrected reflectance. This reflectance has aerosol and surface 
contribution only. Now for each pixel, the 30 day previous Rayleigh corrected reflectance 
is sorted and first and second minima is computed. First minima represent the clearest 
condition, however, due to cloud shadow contamination, sometimes first minima may not 
be the true representative of surface reflectance, therefore to remove shadow effect, and 
we put a threshold test on first minima. If first minima are less than 0.04 then second 
minima will be considered otherwise first minima is considered. The threshold of 0.04 on 
first minimum to avoid shadow effect is empirical. This sorting of Rayleigh corrected 
reflectance and selection of first or second minima is done for all pixel to obtain clear 
composite image. By using this value to obtain the surface reflectance, one assumes that 
aerosol would increase the reflectance and cloud shadows will be rare. The length of the 
time is somewhat subjective. In general, a long enough time is needed for at least one 
cloud-free observation. Knapp et al. (2005) used a two week (i.e., 14 day) period. The 
clear composite reflectance is then corrected for background aerosol optical depth (0.02 
and 0.04 for ocean and land respectively) to estimate Lambertian surface reflectance 
(ρsurf). The image in figure (1) shows Lambartian surface reflectance computed using 
above mentioned method from INSAT-3D data from 4-31 December, 2013 and 4-31 
January 2014 which is used for aerosol inversion on 1 January 2014 and 1 February 2014, 
respectively. 
Aerosol  
     
  
 
 
Figure 1. Shows Lambartian surface reflectance derived from clear composite method 
using INSAT-3D visible channel data (a) derived from data for the period of 4-31 
December 2013. (b) Derived from data for the period of 4-31 January 2013. 
 
The accuracy of the composite depends on the length of time used to create it. For 
instance, enough cloud-free observations must exist with little aerosol influence for the 
surface reflectance to be accurate. Areas of persistent aerosol or cloud cover will be 
likely to have caused errors in the retrieved surface reflectance because the atmospheric 
component remains large in such situations. It is to be noted that in previous version of 
AOD retrieval algorithm (version1 an d 2), instead of minimizing Rayleigh corrected 
reflectance, the TOA radiance was minimized, therefore the effect of change in solar 
zenith angle during the period of previous 30 days decreases the accuracy of derived 
surface reflectance.  
Aerosol Optical Depth Retrieval 
The aerosol optical depth retrieval is performed using an INSAT-3D/3DR imager visible 
image and the retrieved surface reflectance (from the previous step). In this retrieval, the 
current day TOA reflectance is corrected for ozone and water vapour absorption and also 
corrected for Rayleigh reflectance. Then precomputed look tables (using 6S radiative 
transfer model) that consist spherical albedo, reflectance, transmittance as a function of 
sun-sensor geometry and aerosol optical thickness are used to simulate theoretical 
Rayleigh corrected reflectance which is then compared with observed Rayleigh corrected 
INSAT-3DR reflectance to obtained aerosol optical depth. It is to noted that over land 
continental aerosol model is used while over ocean maritime aerosol model is used. In 
previous versions of AOD retrival algorithm, single scattering approximation was used 
for inverting AOD, assuming perfectly scattering aerosol (single scattering albedo 
assumed to be unity). Figure 2 shows the schematic flow chart of the aerosol optical 
thickness (AOD) retrieval procedure. 
 
 
Aerosol  
10.4.1.2 
 Flow Chart 
 
 
 
10.4.2 Operational Implementation 
Step 1: Conversion from gray count to visible radiance and TIR brightness temperature.  
Step 2: Cloud Masking. 
Step 3: Conversion of TOA radiance to TOA reflectance. 
Step 4: Correction of TOA reflectance for gaseous absorption and Rayleigh scattering. 
Step 5: Generation of clear composite image using darkest observation using last 28-days 
data. 
Step 6: Atmospheric correction of clear composite image for background aerosol and 
generation of Lambartian surface reflectance.  
Step 7: Correct current day visible data for gaseous absorption and molecular scattering. 
Step 8: Invert current day Rayleigh corrected reflectance to get AOD using Lambartian 
surface reflectance and pre-computed LUTs. 
 
 
 
Aerosol  
10.5 
Outputs 
Parameter 
Unit 
Min 
Max 
Accuracy 
Resolution 
Aerosol 
optical 
depth at 550 
nm  
Dimensionless  0 
5 
15-20% 
10 Km  
 
10.5.1 format of the output and the domain 
        Lat , Lon, AOD ,   
 
Domain : 
40  to 40 N, 30 E to 120 E 
10.6 
Validation 
10.6.1 Data required 
Prameter 
Resolution 
Source 
AERONET 
spectral 
AOD data 
In-situ point  
observation 
AERONET sites in India Kanpur, 
Gandhi college (Patna) and Jaipur 
Spectral 
AOD 
using 
handheld sun-photometer 
In-situ point  
observation 
Data collection campaigns will be 
organized 
MODIS AOD products 
0.1 to 1 degree 
Data available through internet 
 
10.6.2 Methods of validation 
      AERONET data for Validation  
Post-launch routine ground-based observations can be made using AERONET, and any 
of the several miscellaneous techniques, including the diffuse/direct method, aureole 
meters, and polarization measurements. AeRoNet (Aerosol Robotic Network) is a 
network of ground-based sun-photometers established and maintained by Brent Holben 
of Code 923 of the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and Tom Eck of Raytheon ITSS. 
The sun-photometers measure the spectral aerosol optical thickness and sky radiance. In 
India 3 Aeronet sites namely Kanpur, Goa and Dharwar are providing systematic in-situ 
AOD measurements.  Data from these sites will be used for validation of INSAT-
3D/3DR derived AODs. 
      Post-Launch Special Field Experiments 
Many of the present satellite observations are augmented by special field campaigns to 
provide ground-truth data for the satellite-derived measurements. The INSAT-3D/3DR 
Imager derived aerosol optical thickness measurements will be validated using hand-held 
sun-photometer. The details of these campaigns (timing, location, instrumentation, etc.) 
will be decided later on.  
       
 
Aerosol  
Post-Launch Satellite-Based Inter-comparisons 
INSAT-3D/3DR Imager derived aerosol optical depths may be validated by comparing 
them with aerosol optical depths derived by other satellite sensors, such as MODIS. The 
basic inter-comparison technique involves three steps: 1) identification of locations where 
both sensors fly over at nearly the same time; 2) extraction of data for storage in an inter-
comparison archive; 3) analysis of the differences between the measurements.  
10.7 
Technical issues (Limitation etc.) 
Accuracy of the product depends on the accuracy of the radiation model to simulate the 
satellite radiances. However, the following limitations of the present study have to be 
kept in mind.  
(i) Characterization of surface reflectivity is critical of the study. Use of darkest 
observation for last 28 days provides mean reflectivity. This may also introduce 
significant errors in derived AOD, specially for the location with persistent AOD for long 
period.  
(ii) Due to single visible channel aerosol type is to be fixed which is in reality is not a 
good approximation. This may introduce large errors in retrieved AOD. 
(iii) Over bright surface and high aerosol loadings, TOA reflectance becomes insensitive 
to aerosol therefore; AOD over bright surfaces may have large uncertainty. 
10.8 
Future Scope 
In future algorithms making use of INSAT-3D/3DR imager data for SWIR and MIR 
bands can also be attempted for characterization of surface reflectivity.  
 
 10.9 References 
1. Bergin, M.H., Cass, G.R., Xu, J., Fang, C., Zeng, L.M., Yu, T., Salmon, L.G., Kiang, 
C.S., Tang, X.Y., Zhang, H. and Chameides, W.L., 2001, Aerosol radiative, physical, 
and chemical properties in Beijing during June 1999. Journal of Geophysical 
Research, 106, pp. 17 969–17 980. 
2. Charston, R.J., Langer, J., Rodhe, H., Levoy, C.B. and Warren, S.G., 1991, 
Perturbation of the northern hemisphere radiative balance by backscattering from 
anthropogenic sulfate aerosols. Tellus, 43AB, pp. 152–163. 
3. Hansen, J. E., and A. A. Lacis, 1990, Sun and dust versus greenhouse gases: An 
assessment of their relative roles in global climate change. Nature, 346, 713-719. 
4. Haywood, J. and Boucher, O., 2000, Estimates of the direct and indirect radiative 
forcing due to tropospheric aerosols: a review. Reviews of Geophysics, 38, pp. 513–
543. 
5. Herman, B.M. and Browning, S.R., 1975, The effect of aerosols on the Earth-
atmosphere albedo. Journal of Atmospheric Science, 32, pp. 1430–1445. 
6. Kaufman, Y.J., Tanre, D., Remer, L.A., Vermote, E.F., Chu, A. and Holben, B.N., 
1997, Operational remote sensing of tropospheric aerosol over land from EOS 
moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer. Journal of Geophysical Research, 
102, pp. 17051–17067. 
7. Kaufman, Y.J., Tanre, D. and Boucher, O., 2002, A satellite view of aerosols in the 
climate system. Nature, 419, pp. 215–223. 
Aerosol  
8. Knapp, K.R., Vonder Harr, T.H. and Kaufman, Y.J., 2002, Aerosol optical depth 
retrieval from GOES-8: uncertainty study and retrieval validation over South America. 
Journal of Geophysical Research, 107, 10.1029/2001JD000505.  
9. Knapp, K. R., Frouin, R, Kondragunta and Prados, A., 2005, Toward aerosol optical 
depth retrievals over land from GOES visible radiances: determining surface 
reflectance, International Journal of Remote Sensing.  
10. Mishra, M. K., 2018, Retrieval of Aerosol optical depth from INSAT-3D Imager over 
Asian landmass and adjoining ocean: Retrieval uncertainty and validation, Journal of 
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 123 (10), 5484-5508.  
11. Platnick, S. and Twomey, S., 1994, Remote sensing the susceptibility of cloud albedo 
to changes in drop concentration. Atmospheric Research, 34, pp. 85–98. 
12. Smirnov, A., Holben, B.N., Dubovik, O.V., O’Neill, N.T., Eck, T.F., Westphal, D.L., 
Goroch, A.K., Pietras, C. and Slutsker, I., 2002, Atmospheric aerosol optical 
properties in the Persian Gulf. Journal of Atmospheric Science, 59, pp. 620–634. 
13. Stowe, L.L., Davis, P.A. and McClain, E.P., 1999, Scientific basis and initial 
evaluation of the CLAVR-1 global clear/cloud classification algorithm for the 
advanced very high resolution radiometer. Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic 
Technology, 16, pp. 656–681. 
14. Zhang, J., Christopher, S.A. and Holben, B., 2001, Intercomparison of aerosol optical 
thickness derived from GOES 8 imager and ground-based Sun photometers. Journal 
of Geophysical Research, 106, pp. 7387–7397. 
 
 
