1 | P a g e  
 
 
MRG/EPSA/SAC/Dec2020/Version1.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meteorological and Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival Centre (MOSDAC) 
Data Dissemination Guidelines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Space Applications Centre (ISRO) 
Ahmedabad, INDIA 
 
2 | P a g e  
 
 
Document Control Sheet 
 
 
Report Number 
MRG/EPSA/SAC/Dec2020/Version1.0 
Title 
Meteorological and Oceanographic Satellite Data 
Archival Centre (MOSDAC) Data Dissemination 
Guidelines 
Type of Report  
Technical 
No. Of pages 
5 
Authors 
EPSA, TTID (SAC) and EDPO (ISRO-HQ) 
Originating Unit 
MRG/EPSA/SAC 
Abstract 
This document provides guidelines for operational 
dissemination of MOSDAC data  
Keywords 
MOSDAC, Browse Products, Web services, Satellite 
Data Products, General User, NRT user, Ground 
Observations 
Distribution 
Open Access 
Revision History 
First Draft on 20-12-2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 | P a g e  
 
Meteorological and Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival Centre (MOSDAC) 
Data Dissemination Guidelines 
The Indian Space Research Organisation recognises the need for exchange of 
meteorological and oceanographic satellite data and information services among the 
scientific community, researchers, academia and Industry. With this philosophy, the 
data access guidelines for meteorological and oceanographic satellite data hosted on 
Meteorological and Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival Centre (MOSDAC) web 
site are framed.  
These guidelines are governed by different Data policies framed by Government of 
India, Department of Space and Indian Space Research Organisation and will be 
changed/updated from time to time in line with these policies.  
1. 
Classification of Data and Users 
The meteorological and oceanographic data available on MOSDAC is classified into 
following categories.  
a) Browse Products: Subsampled products provided in internet compatible 
formats such as jpg, gif and png 
b) Web Services: Data and Information Provided using standard Open Geospatial 
Consortium complied protocols 
c) Satellite Data Products: Standard Products and Geophysical Parameters 
provided in HDF, netCDF and geoTiff formats. 
d) Ground Observations: Ground Observation data available at MOSDAC 
e) Model Forecast/Nowcast: Experimental Forecast/Nowcast generated and 
disseminated by SAC/ISRO 
Following types of users are defined: 
 General Users 
 Near Real Time (NRT) Users  
 
2. 
General Guidelines 
 
a) Data will be made available on MOSDAC on best effort basis 
b) Users need to utilize the data on “as is where is basis” 
c)  Data which is made available on commercial basis by DOS/ISRO will not be 
disseminated through MOSDAC. 
d) The data declared sensitive as per prevailing Remote Sensing Data Policy will 
not be disseminated as part of this guidelines. 
4 | P a g e  
 
a. MOSDAC reserves right to withdraw or discontinue any data from its 
website without prior notice. Access to MOSDAC is provided free of cost 
as per prevailing policy to General and NRT users, however there may be 
charges for customization or value addition. 
  
3. 
Data Distribution Guidelines 
Based on the type of user and the type of data, the following guidelines will be used 
for data distribution. 
a) Browse products will be made available to users without any registration. 
However MOSDAC will keep a log of IP’s accessing website and browse 
products. For access to all other products, user will need to register on 
MOSDAC.  
b) General users will be able to order all archive products, Geophysical parameters 
will be provided on NRT basis, all other products will be provided with a latency 
of 3 days. 
c)  NRT users will be able to access all products in near real time (NRT). 
d) By default, a user will be approved as a General user and rights for access to 
NRT data (NRT User) will be provided on case to case basis by assessing the 
utility of the application. 
 
4. 
Additional Guidelines (Applicable for all users) 
 
a. Citations and Credits 
It is mandatory that the end user must use the DOI associated with the data for 
citation purpose and credit the data source with following line “Data Source 
MOSDAC/SAC/ISRO. https://mosdac.gov.in” 
 
b. Re-distribution 
1. Users are not allowed to resell/redistribute products downloaded or acquired 
from MOSDAC. However, Value Added products generated by them may be 
distributed without any restrictions. 
2. Users who has Re-distribution clause in the agreement signed with SAC or 
ISRO can do so subject to mutually agreed terms. 
 
c. Liability  
1. The products are provided on best effort basis and while we endeavour to 
keep the products up to date and correct, we make no representations or 
warranties of any kind, about the inferences derived from the information, 
5 | P a g e  
 
data products, services, or related graphics contained along with the product 
or on website, for any purpose unless and until explicitly mentioned.  
2. In no event, will we be liable for any loss or damage arising out of, or in 
connection with, the use of these products. 
 
d. Business, Industry and special users 
1. All Business, Industry and Specialized users can access and use MOSDAC 
data for commercial activities as per above General/NRT user guidelines. 
2. Business and Industry sector requiring support and access to 
customized/value added products/services can enter into an   agreement with 
SAC/ ISRO. The term and condition of the use of customized products will 
be governed by the terms of agreement. 
 
e. Disaster Management and Support 
MOSDAC data will be made available for disaster management and support related 
activities to identified agencies. This will have following additional waivers for data 
sharing. 
1. The Disaster Management agencies will be able to share this data with other 
agencies for the requirements for disaster management and support.     
 
