Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document 
For 
Analysed Chlorophyll products 

Sr 
No. 
Product Name 
Spatial 
Resolution 
Temporal 
Resolution 
1 
E06OCM_L4_AC 

. . 
Daily 

1. Algorithm Configuration Information 
1.1 Algorithm Name: Analysed chlorophyll fields for the global ocean using Particle 
Filter technique 
1.2 Algorithm Identifier: E06OCM_L4_AC 
1.3 Algorithm Specification 
Version 
Date 
Description 
Prepared by 
1.0 
16/12/2024 
Analysed 
chlorophyll fields 
for global ocean 
using 
Particle 
Filter technique 

Smitha Ratheesh 

 Contributors: Smitha Ratheesh, Jishad M, Neeraj Agarwal, Shivani Shah, Ruchi 
Modi, Ghansham Shankar, Tushar Shukla, and Rashmi Sharma 

2. INTRODUCTION: Satellite measurements of ocean colour allow synoptic 
coverage of ocean biological production on a global scale. Satellite derived 
chlorophyll measurements provide global distribution of phytoplankton CHL-
a on high spatial and temporal scale. The accurate measurements of ocean 
chlorophyll concentration are very critical to understand the regional and 
global impact of climate change on marine ecosystem. Considering the 
contribution of chlorophyll-a measurements to the characterization of Earths 
climate, World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has identified CHL-a as 
one of the Essential Climate Variable (ECV) under ocean category. However, 
the continuous availability of satellite based CHL-a is a major challenge due 
to the obstruction of the visible part of the e.m spectrum by clouds. Moreover, 
the observations from ocean colour near coastal region suffer from inaccurate 
atmospheric correction due to the optical complexity in the coastal waters. 
Coupled physical-biogeochemical modelling provides a key insight into the 
interaction of elements in the physical and biogeochemical system of marine 
ecosystem. The coupled models, thus become an essential tool in the scientific 
community to elucidate the mechanism of physical and marine system and 
predict its evolution in both space and time scale. It enhanced the scope to 
study the biogeochemical and ecological responses to physical forcing, which 
is a key component in the climate change science and environmental risk 
assessment. 
2.1 Overview and Background: The synergistic use of satellite derived 
chlorophyll and model simulated chlorophyll is adapted in order to explore the 
advantages offered by both systems in the generation of analysed fields of 
chlorophyll. For this purpose, daily fields of model chlorophyll from a coupled 
physical-biogeochemical model are modified with respect to satellite derived 
chlorophyll data by statistically combining both fields of chlorophyll using 
Particle filter technique for the global ocean. Particle Filter is an ensemble 
based technique like ensemble Kalman filter (van Leeuwen, 2009). But unlike 
methods like EnKF, ensemble optimal interpolation (Evensen, 2003) etc, 
particle filter doesnt change the dynamical balance of the system and also does 
not consider the apriori assumption of the Gaussianity of the probability 
distribution function (PDF) of the system. This makes particle filter more 
suitable for non-linear systems like ocean dynamics. Recently the particle filter 
techniques have been successfully utilized in assimilation of chlorophyll data 
in a coupled bio-physical model (Ratheesh et al., 2016) and in the assimilation 
of highly non-linear coastal waves in a wave models (Bhowmick et al., 2019). 
2.2 Objective 
The main objective of this document is to provide step wise implementation of 
the algorithm, along with required inputs and desired outputs. This document 
will form the basis of operational implementation of the algorithm. 
2.3 Input data sets 
2.3.1 Satellite Data: Chlorophyll-a global product from OCM3 onboard 
OCEANSAT-3 is used in the algorithm to improve model simulations of 
chlorophyll. GAC products are available scene wise at 1 km resolution wise 
(https://bhoonidhi.nrsc.gov.in). More than 200 scenes are available daily for 
the entire globe. Therefore, a gridded field of OCM-3 chlorophyll-a is 
generated as an intermediate product for the global ocean at 4km resolution 
combining all the OCM-3 products available for the particular day. 
2.3.2 Model Data: Chlorophyll from coupled physical-biogeochemical model 
(MOM5-TOPAZ) for the global ocean is used as the background chlorophyll 
field in the algorithm. This model is operationally running at SAC. 
2.3.2.1 General description of the Ocean General Circulation Model 
Ocean General circulation model used for the simulation of physical 
parameters of ocean is Modular Ocean Model, version 5 (MOM-5). It is a 
numerical representation of the oceans hydrostatic primitive equations 
employing either Boussinesq (volume conserving) or non-Boussinesq (mass 
conserving) kinematics. The present study use Boussinesq kinematics. This 
model is developed by NOAAs Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
(GFDL) in Princeton, USA. The horizontal grids used in MOM5 are 
generalized horizontal coordinates, with the coordinates assumed to be locally 
orthogonal. For global ocean climate modeling, MOM uses the tripolar grid 
that has a bipolar Arctic region (Murray , 1996). The model also employs a 
split-explicit time stepping scheme where fast two-dimensional dynamics is 
sub-cycled within the slower three dimensional dynamics. MOM gives a wide 
array of vertical mixing schemes and the present model configuration used 
KPP scheme. 
2.3.2.2. Description of the Ecosystem model 
The present configuration for global ocean is a coupled one, in which MOM5, 
the ocean component is coupled to an ocean ecosystem model. A 
comprehensive model of oceanic ecosystems and biogeochemical cycles is 
used to understand and simulate the ocean ecosystem. The model used is 
Tracers Of Phytoplankton and Allometric Zooplankton (TOPAZ). TOPAZ is 
a state of the art model that considers 22 tracers including three phytoplankton 
groups, two forms of dissolved organic matter, heterotrophic biomass, and 
dissolved inorganic species for C, N, P, Si, Fe, CaCO3 and O2 cycling. The 
model includes such processes as gas exchange, atmospheric deposition, 
scavenging, N2 xation and water column and sediment denitrication, and 
runo of C, N, Fe, O2, alkalinity and lithogenic material. The phytoplankton 
functional groups undergo co-limitation by light, nitrogen, phosphorus and 
iron with exible physiology. Loss of phytoplankton is parameterized through 
the size-based relationship of Dunne et al. (2012b). Particle export is described 
through size and temperature based detritus formation and mineral protection 
during sinking with a mechanistic, solubility-based representation alkalinity 
addition from rivers, CaCO3 sedimentation and sediment preservation and 
dissolution. 
For each model state variable C , the continuity equation is solved 

= . + + 
Where is the velocity vector from the OGCM , is the diffusivity, and 
is the sum of the sources and sinks for state variable C. 
2.3.2.3 Coupled biogeochemical - physical model (MOM5-TOPAZ) 
The coupled biogeochemical - physical model is configured for global ocean 
with a horizontal resolution of 25 km and a variable vertical resolution with a 
very fine near surface and coarser towards the bottom of ocean. There are 50 
levels in the vertical direction. The external time step used is 22.5 sec and the 
internal time step used is 1800 sec. The model bottom topography is derived 
from the 2 minute resolution ETOPO 2 database. The surface salt is restored 
to climatology on a time scale of 2 months. 
During spin up, the physical model was forced by climatological wind and flux 
data sets and was initialized with temperature and salinity data from Levitus. 
The model was spun up for 50 years from rest. Afterwards, TOPAZ model is 
coupled with the physical model and performed a climatology run for another 
10 years. For this nitrate, phosphate and silicate are initialised using data from 
WOA13. After this, an inter-annual run is performed using the daily forcing 
fields of wind, net short and long wave radiation, precipitation, air temperature 
and specific humidity from NCMRWF from 2018 onwards. Model forecast is 
also performed using the NCMRWF data sets for the next 8 days. Model 
forecasts are written for every six hours, while the analysis fields are written 
daily. 
2.3.3 Other Auxiliary data: None 
Table 1: Input data sets for the algorithm 
Data sets 
Spatial Resolution 
Temporal 
Resolution 
Chlorophyll 
from 
coupled model 
25 km x 25 km 
Daily 
Chlorophyll 
from 
OCM-3 
(GAC 
product) 
1 km 
Daily 

3. Algorithm Functional Specifications 
 In this section we describe the theoretical basis and algorithm overview for generating 
daily analysed fields of ocean surface chlorophyll for the global ocean. 
3.1. Overview 
OCM-3 derived chlorophyll products are assimilated into the coupled model using particle 
filter technique to generate more improved fields of model chlorophyll state. Bootstrap 
technique is used to generate particles/ensembles from model background field, which is 
chlorophyll field at ocean surface. A gridded field of OCM3 derived chlorophyll fields at 
4 km is generated daily for the global ocean as an intermediate product. These three major 
steps in the algorithm are shown in Figure 1. 

Figure 1: Major steps involved in the generation of analysed chlorophyll product 

3.2. Generation of 4km gridded fields of OCM-3 derived Chlorophyll (Intermediate 
product): GAC products of chlorophyll for the global ocean are available scene wise 
and includes many number of GAC data products for a single day. Therefore, an 
intermediate product of OCM-3 chlorophyll is generated daily for the global ocean at 
4 km resolution. For the purpose, firstly a background data with 4 km pixel resolution 
is generated for the global ocean. Secondly, each of the GAC products are scanned 
location wise and corresponding chlorophyll value is allotted to the specific 4 km pixel 
corresponding to the location. Figure 2 shows flowchart of generating the gridded 
fields of OCM-3 chlorophyll for the global ocean. For an example, the gridded OCM-
3 derived chlorophyll for the global ocean is shown for 28 November 2023. More than 
200 GAC scenes were considered to generate gridded OCM-3 product for the 
mentioned day. 

Figure 2: Flowchart of gridded 4 km OCM-3 chlorophyll data for the global ocean. 

Figure 3: Gridded 4 km OCM-3 derived Chlorophyll for the global ocean for 28 
November 2023. Some of the GAP scenes for the same day are also shown. More than 
200 GAC scenes were considered to generate gridded product for a day. 

3.3. Theoretical Background of Particle Filter technique 
The algorithm used for the assimilation of satellite derived CHL into the coupled 
model is a state of the art ensemble based particle filter technique. Particle filtering 
uses a set of particles to represent the posterior distribution of a stochastic process 
given noisy and/or partial observations. The novelty of the scheme lies in the fact 
that, unlike other ensemble technique, particle filter does not impose any 
restriction on the form of the PDF of the background field. Thus, its superiority in 
nonlinear and non-Gaussian systems makes it widely acceptable to many 
applications (van Leeuwen, 2009, 2010). The realistic implementation of Particle 
filter is explained in Mattern et al., 2013; Ratheesh et al., 2016 and Bhowmick et 
al 2019. 
Particle filtering method approximate the posterior distribution using 
randomly extracted particle sets from the posterior probability. The central 
concept is to determine the distribution of the systems state variable with 
minimal variability or uncertainty, and is achieved by updating the 
probability distribution of the state variable based on observed data and 
system dynamics. The cornerstone of particle filter is Bayess theorem which 
reads 
(|) =
(|)()
()

(1) 
Where: 
1. (|) is the Posterior distribution, representing the true state of the 
system generated using model simulated chlorophyll () given chlorophyll 
observations () from OCM-3. 
2. (|) is the likelihood function, representing the probability of 
observing given the prior information about the state of the system, 
which is the model simulated chlorophyll. This term plays a crucial role in 
assigning weights to the model particles based on their consistency with 
the observed data. 
3. () is the prior information about the ocean surface chlorophyll, also 
known as background fields. These are obtained from coupled model 
simulations of chlorophyll. A set of randomly selected model particles 
represent the Probability Distribution Function (PDF) of the background 
fields. 
The model PDF can be written as 
p() = 
1

()

=1
 (2) 
where, N is the number of particles. is spanning the range from 1 to N. 
The term () represents the PDF of an individual particle centered 
around its value , where is the Dirac delta function. The number of 
particles in the study N is 250. 
4. () is the probability of observations. Its computation can be 
challenging, particularly in scenarios with sparse observations. This 
probability is not directly computed but is implicitly represented by the 
sum of weights of particles (). These weights, assigned to each particle 
based on its likelihood of matching the observations, collectively form a 
probability distribution. Normalizing the weights ensures that they sum 
up to one, effectively representing the likelihood of observing across all 
particles. Thus, the () can be written as: 
() = 

=1
 (3) 
where is the weight of each particle computed with respect to the 
observations. 
The computation of weights is a crucial step in the particle filter technique 
and is represented by: 

=
(|)

(|)

=1

(4) 
Therefore, represents the likelihood of observing given each particle 
 compared to the total likelihood of observing across all particles. As 
mentioned earlier, weights are already normalized so that their sum is unity. 
Weight is inversely proportional to the distance between a given observation 
and its model background. The distance is taken to be usual root mean square 
difference between model chlorophyll and OCM-3 derived chlorophyll, 
taken over those model grids where observations are available on a particular 
day. Thus, the particles close to observation receive more weight as 
compared to farther ones. In this study, model particles of chlorophyll close 
to OCM-3 derived chlorophyll assign large weightage and becomes strong 
particles, while weak particles are discarded. The posterior distribution is 
then represented by the set of particles with stronger weights. These particles, 
with higher weights, are considered to be more likely to represent the true 
state of the system based on the available observations. 

3.4. Particle filter and its implementation procedure 
One critical aspect of the ensemble-based approach in high-dimensional 
coupled models is the generation of a large number of ensembles or particles 
needed to closely approximate the posterior probability density of the system. 
Particle generation in this study is done using bootstrapping sampling by 
introducing random biases to the background field (Bhowmick et al 2019). 
This approach substantially reduces the computational time required for 
particle generation, which otherwise needs a distinct model run for each 
particle generation in the conventional particle filter techniques. The random 
Gaussian biases are computed with zero mean and 0.5 mg/m3 standard 
deviation. Here, we used standard deviation of the model chlorophyll to 
define the PDF of random biases. The randomly introduced biases are then 
modified for each model grid point with respect to both the model 
chlorophyll values at each grid point and the model bias. In this way, the 
correction term added to the model chlorophyll varies spatially with respect 
to the values of chlorophyll at that grid location. Model bias is computed 
from the long-term model simulations with respect to satellite-derived 
chlorophyll and its value is 0.3 mg/m3. This method results in a total of 250 
particles being drawn by introducing biases to the background field. 
Another important step in the Particle Filter technique is the selection of 
strong particles to represent Posterior PDF. This is done using a sequential 
importance resampling (SIR) method (van Leeuwen 2009, Bhowmick et al., 
2019, Bhowmick et. al. 2023) to ensure robust estimation of the posterior 
distribution. The basic idea is to discard particles with low weights and retain 
multiple copies of particles with relatively higher weights, keeping the total 
number of particles the same. Selection of particles based on its weight is 
carried out using Sequential Importance Resampling (SIR) method. In this 
method, weights are first normalised ([0 1)] and then added to form a 
cumulative distribution. A random generator is used to generate random 
numbers and the weights close to this random number is selected from 
cumulative distribution and this process is repeated multiple times. 
Probability is very high for choosing particles with higher weight from a 
cumulative distribution. Thus, the weights for each particle are computed, 
and the particles are resampled, assigning them equal weights (1/N). N is the 
total number of ensembles generated. This weight calculation and resampling 
process is how observations are assimilated into the model. Particle 
degeneracy is a common problem associated with ensemble-based 
techniques, where a very few particles carry significant weights, while the 
majority have negligible weights. This leads to a loss of diversity in the 
particle population and inaccurate representation of the posterior distribution. 
SIR addresses this issue by retaining the multiple copies of stronger particles 
and ensuring that the particle population remains diverse during the 
resampling process, where particles are randomly selected based on their 
weights. Assigning equal weights to all selected particles during resampling 
ensures that each particle has an equal chance of being selected. This 
prevents the loss of valuable information and improves the sampling 
efficiency and robustness of the sampling variability. 
The flowchart of generating analysed chlorophyll fields for the global ocean 
is given in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 : Flow chart of the methodology for generating analysed 
chlorophyll fields 

3.5. Operational Implementation: The implementation steps that are to be followed are 
mentioned below and is also shown in Figure 5. 
Step 1: Daily fields of ocean surface chlorophyll output generated from MOM5-
TOPAZ coupled model in MOSDAC is considered as the model background data. 
Step 2: OCM-3 GAC chlorophyll data downloaded from Bhunidhi NRSC site is 
considered as the observation. 
Step 3: Checking the availability of model and OCM-3 data. If both data sets are 
available, following steps (steps 4 6) will be carried out to generate final product of 
analysed chlorophyll field. 
Step 4: Generation of daily gridded fields of OCM-3 Chlorophyll combining all GAC 
products for the particular day. 
Step 5: Preparation of 250 ensembles from model background field using Bootstrap 
technique. 
Step 6: Generation of daily analysed fields of chlorophyll for the global ocean using 
Particle Filter technique. 

Figure 5: Steps involved in the Operational Implementation 

3.6 Output: Daily fields of chlorophyll from coupled model is improved using particle 
filter technique incorporating OCM-3 derived chlorophyll data. Therefore, the output 
generated is available at the same temporal and spatial resolution of the coupled model, 
which is at 25 km spatial resolution and daily. 
3.6.1. Format of Output : The outputs are available as images (jpeg format) and 
product file (nc format). The analysed chlorophyll fields displayed in the Gallery 
section in the MOSDAC is shown in Figure 6 for the day 25 January 2024. 

Figure 6. A typical standard output available in MOSDAC Gallery section 
3.7 Initial Validation 
For inter-comparison and validation, independent observations of satellite and Bio-
Argo buoys are used for the period September 2023 to November 2023. 
3.7.1 Analysis with Multi-Satellite Chlorophyll data 
For validating the analysed products, results are compared with available 
satellite observations. For the purpose, we have used chlorophyll data from 
sensors other than OCM-3 such as MODIS, VIIRS, etc. This validation can 
be considered as an independent validation as these satellite information is 
not incorporated while generating the analysed chlorophyll product. A 
merged product of chlorophyll from these satellites are downloaded from 
https://marine.copernicus.eu. 
To generate analysed chlorophyll fields, OCM-3 derived chlorophyll is 
assimilated to the coupled model simulated chlorophyll to improve the model 
simulations of surface chlorophyll. Therefore, validation is carried to check 
the improvement brought to the model simulations through the incorporation 
of OCM-3 data. Figure 7 shows the weekly average of chlorophyll (15 Oct 
2023 to 22 Oct 2023) from various sources; 1) Coupled model chlorophyll, 
2) Analysed Chlorophyll, 3) Chlorophyll from OCM-3, and 4) Merged 
Chlorophyll data from multi-satellites. It is clear from Figure 7 that analysed 
chlorophyll fields capture the chlorophyll features in the ocean as observed 
in the multi satellite data. However, a slight overestimation is observed in the 
analysed products towards polar region beyond 60o latitude in both the 
hemispheres and is partially attributed to the sparse observations of OCM-3 
in those regions and the bootstrapping sampling used in the study. While 
sampling, all the model points are altered adding random biases to the 
background filed. These particles are then compared with OCM-3 
chlorophyll data to select strong particles as mentioned in the methodology 
section. Therefore, quantity and quality of OCM-3 observations play crucial 
role in the generation of more accurate analysed fields of chlorophyll. OCM-
3 shows a positive bias all over the ocean with respect to multi-satellite 
chlorophyll data. 

Figure 7: Chlorophyll from various sources averaged over the period 15 Oct 
to 22 Oct 2023. a) Coupled model chlorophyll, (b) Analysed Chlorophyll, c) 
OCM-3 derived Chlorophyll, and d) Merged product from multi satellites. 
Figures 8 and 9 show mean and standard deviation of chlorophyll from 
different sources. It is very vivid from the figures that assimilation of OCM-
3 data improved model simulations of chlorophyll. Analysed fields of 
chlorophyll is more close to chlorophyll observations from multi-satellite as 
compared to model simulations of chlorophyll and OCM-3 derived 
chlorophyll. The features of wind-driven upwelling induced chlorophyll 
concentrations in the western Arabian are enhanced in the analysed 
chlorophyll fields due to OCM-3 integration compared to chlorophyll 
simulations from coupled model without OCM-3 data. 

Figure 8: Mean of the ocean surface chlorophyll: a) Coupled model 
chlorophyll, b) Analysed Chlorophyll, c) OCM-3 derived Chlorophyll, and 
d) Chlorophyll from multi satellites. 

Figure 9: Standard deviation of the ocean surface chlorophyll: a) Coupled 
model chlorophyll, b) Analysed Chlorophyll, c) OCM-3 derived Chlorophyll, 
and d) Chlorophyll from multi satellites 
3.7.2 Comparison with Bio-Argo data 
Independent validation of the analysed chlorophyll and merged chlorophyll 
from multi-satellites has been conducted using Bio-Argo measurements. Bio-
Argo is an extension of the Argo program, incorporating biogeochemical 
observations, including chlorophyll-a concentration, oxygen concentration, 
pH, and more. These floats are deployed and managed by an international 
community in coordination with institutes from various countries (Wong et 
al., 2020). Bio-Argo floats are downloaded from htttps://biogeochmical-
argo.org. 
Figure 10 shows the buoy locations used for the comparison. Multi-satellites 
chlorophyll, Analysed Chlorophyll, and model simulated chlorophyll 
without OCM-3 are compared with buoy measured chlorophyll and the 
statics are shown in the Table 1. Percentage error is computed using the 
equation 

 100. 
RMSE is found less for the analysed chlorophyll compared to multi-satellite 
derived chlorophyll when compared against Bio-Argo data. One added 
advantage in the Analysed chlorophyll is the availability of data at all ocean 
points. Another reason is that collocated points are less in the case of multi-
satellite data and is owing to the data void due to cloud obstruction. This 
issue does not affect analysed chlorophyll data as it is generated by 
combining chlorophyll observation with model simulation, providing 
chlorophyll at all model grid points. Additionally, analysed chlorophyll has 
the advantage of model simulations and observations and its the errors are 
less compared to other two individual components such as model simulations 
and observations. Analysed chlorophyll OCF data exhibits a positive bias of 
0.24 mg/m3 and is partially attributed to the positive bias in OCM-3 
chlorophyll observations. Among the three CHL datasets, analysed CHL 
shows a lower percentage error, indicating better performance. 

Figure 10. Bio-Argo buoy locations for the validation period. 
Table 1 : Statistics obtained against BIOARGO data 

Model 
Simulated 
CHL 
(without 
OCM-3) 
Analysed 
CHL (With 
OCM-3) 
Multi-
satellite 
CHL 
Collocated points 
7843 
7843 
3502 
Bias (mg/m3) 
0.485 
0.24 
-0.16 
RMSE (mg/m3) 
0.6508 
0.53 
0.97 
Correlation Coefficient 
0.46 
0.43 
0.57 
Percentage 
error 
(

 100) 
100.49 
81.84 
149.78 

3.8 Generation of Analysed Chlorophyll fields using latest version of OCM-3 data 
The latest version of the OCM-3 product available at NRSC Bhoonidhi site is used to 
generate analysed chlorophyll products as suggested by the ATBD review committee. 
Chlorophyll from various sources for the days 02 Jan 2025 and 10Jan2025 is shown in 
figures 11 and 12. 

Figure 11: Chlorophyll from various sources for the day 02 Jan 2025. a) Coupled model chlorophyll, (b) 
Analysed Chlorophyll, c) OCM-3 derived Chlorophyll (New Version), and d) Merged product from multi 
satellites. 

Figure 12: Chlorophyll from various sources for the day 10 Jan 2025. a) Coupled model chlorophyll, (b) 
Analysed Chlorophyll, c) OCM-3 derived Chlorophyll (New Version), and d) Merged product from multi 
satellites. 

3.9 Results from CA (SPPU, Pune) under Oceansat-3 project 
The analysed chlorophyll products have been used by Savitribai Phule Pune University 
(SPPU), Pune, CA under Oceansat-3 project. As suggested by the ATBD review 
committee, a part of their work with analysed chlorophyll fields are also included here. 
Monthly analysed chlorophyll for the global ocean has been generated by SAC at 25 km 
resolution using multi-satellite derived chlorophyll and TOPAZ model for the duration 
1998 to 2015 and is provided to CA for their study. Seasonally varying compensation 
depth have been computed for the Indian Ocean using the OTTM (Ocean Tracer Transport 
Model) model and analyzed Chlorophyll-a provided by SAC and is shown in Figure 13. 
Compensation depth is then used for computing export production for the Indian Ocean. 

Figure 13: Seasonal mean of varying compensation depth (1998-2015) using analysed chlorophyll data 
from SAC 

4.0 Limitations: The algorithm, as mentioned depends on the quality of the chlorophyll 
data simulation, observation (OCM-3 derived chlorophyll) and the sampling method 
adopted for generating multiple ensembles. Additionally, the model is not currently 
forward-integrated with the improved initial conditions of chlorophyll. 
4.1 Future Aspect: The algorithm used here is to generate analysed ocean surface 
chlorophyll. A fully fledged data assimilation scheme, which sequentially incorporates the 
modified model fields into the model future projections is planned as future work. The 
possibility of assimilating Bio-Argo measured chlorophyll and the use of the optimal 
Interpolation technique to generate analysed chlorophyll fields for the global ocean will 
also be explored. 
4.2 Potential Users of the data: One of the highlight of the analysed CHL products is the 
gap-free data for the global ocean. This analysed CHL products are beneficial for studies 
related to biogeochemistry, PFZ, carbon export, time series analysis, distribution of 
chlorophyll in the ocean, interaction of eddies and chlorophyll, etc. Some of the expected 
end-users of this product are INCOIS, SSPU, NIO, etc 

4. REFERENCES: 

 Evensen, G. (2009). Data assimilation: the ensemble Kalman filter. 
Berlin: Springer. 

 Mattern, J. P., Dowd, M., & Fennel, K. (2013). Particle filter-based data 
assimilation for a three-dimensional biological ocean model and satellite 
observations. Journal of Geophysical Research, 118, 27462760. 

 Ratheesh, S., Chakraborty, A., Sharma, R., & Basu, S. (2016). 
Assimilation of satellite chlorophyll measurements into a coupled 
biophysical model of the Indian Ocean with a guided particle filter. 
Remote Sensing Letters, 7(5), 446455. 

 van Leeuwen, P. J. (2009). Particle filtering in geophysical systems. 
Monthly Weather Review, 137, 40894114. 

 van Leeuwen, P. J. (2010). Nonlinear data assimilation in geosciences: an 
extremely efficient particle filter. Quarterly Journal of the Royal 
Meteorological Society, 136, 19911999. 

 Bhowmick, S.A., Ratheesh, S., Sharma, R., Basu, S., and Kumar, R.A. 
(2019). Simplified Assimilation Scheme for a Coastal Wave Model Using 
Concepts of Particle Filter, Pure and Applied Geophysics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00024-019-02343-9 

 Wong, A.P.S., et al. (2020). Argo Data 1999-2019: Two million 
temperature-salinity profiles and subsurface velocity observations from a 
global array of profiling floats, Frontiers in marine Science, 7(700), doi: 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.00700. 

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: 

The authors are grateful to Director, Space Applications Centre (SAC) for 
the support. Special thanks for Dr. Rashmi Sharma DD EPSA, Dr. P K 
Thapliyal GD AOSG, and Dr K N Babu, Head, BOD for their whole hearted 
support for this work. MOSDAC team, particularly Nikunj and Vasant are 
acknowledged for their contribution in the operationalization of Analysed 
Chlorophyll product at MOSDAC website (www.mosdac.gov.in). Authors 
sincerely thank Dr Bipasha Paul Shukla, Head, Environmental Sciences 
Division, SAC, Dr. Suchandra Aich Bhowmick, POD, SAC, and Dr. Sujit 
Basu, Retd.Scientist, SAC for stimulating discussions for this work. The 
Bio-Argo data were collected and made freely available by the International 
Argo Program and the national programs that contribute to it. 
(https://argo.ucsd.edu, https://www.ocean-ops.org). The Argo Program is 
part of the Global Ocean Observing System.