Copyright Policy:

Material featured may be reproduced free of charge in any format or media without requiring specific permission. This is subject to the material being reproduced accurately and not being used in a derogatory manner or in a misleading context. Where the material is being published or issued to others, the source must be prominently acknowledged. However, the permission to reproduce this material does not extend to any material on this site, which is explicitly identified as being copyright of a third party as well as to materials contained in the hyperlinked sites. Authorization to reproduce such material must be obtained from the copyright holders concerned.

Data Access Policy:

Access Profile | Datasets | Latency
-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------
Registered General Users | Access to limited | Latency of 3 days
Registered Privileged Users | Access to all data | NRT Access
Anonymous Users | Access to metadata/image and Open Data | NRT Access

Data access will be provided as per above policies (all that applies).

Data Access Guidelines:
(Bilingual (https://mosdac.gov.in/look/DOCS/mosdac-data-guidelines.pdf); Size: 415KB Format: PDF Tool: PDFViewer)
(English(https://mosdac.gov.in/look/DOCS/mosdac-data-guidelines_english.pdf); Size: 323KB Format: PDF Tool: PDFViewer)

Hyperlink Policy:

Links to external websites/portals

At many places in this Portal, you shall find links to other websites/portals. This links have been placed for your convenience.We are not responsible for the contents and reliability of the linked websites and does not necessarily endorse the views expressed in them. Mere presence of the link or its listing on this Portal should not be assumed as endorsement of any kind. We can not guarantee that these links will work all the time and we have no control over availability of linked pages.

Links to our Portal by other websites

We do not object to you linking directly to the information that is hosted on this Portal and no prior permission is required for the same. However, we would like you to inform us about any links provided to this Portal so that you can be informed of any changes or updations therein. Also, we do not permit our pages to be loaded into frames on your site. The pages belonging to this Portal must load into a newly opened browser window of the User.

Privacy Policy:

This Policy outlines the types of information we gather about you and how we use it. We understand that your personal information is very sensitive, and protecting the privacy of this information is a top priority for us. All the information collected by this site will be kept strictly confidential. We do not rent, sell or share your personal information with any other third party.

We will not disclose your personal information with any other third party unless: To help investigate, prevent or take action regarding unlawful and illegal activities, suspected fraud, potential threat to the safety or security of any person, violations of http://www.mosdac.gov.in terms of use or to defend against legal claims. Special circumstances such as compliance with subpoenas, court orders, requests/order from legal authorities or law enforcement agencies requiring such disclosure. If we ever change the Privacy Policy, we will post that information on this page. If you have any questions about http://www.mosdac.gov.in Privacy Policy, please e-mail us at admin[at]mosdac[dot]gov[dot]in.

Website Policies:

Content Archival Policy:

The content components are created with metadata, source and validity date. There would be some content which is permanent in nature and for such content it is assumed that the content would be reviewed in every ten years unless it is edited / deleted based on requirement. The content shall not be displayed on the Website after the validity date. The content components like documents, reports is regularly reviewed as per the Content Review Policy.

The content is reviewed at least two weeks prior to the validity date and if required content will be revalidated and validity date is modified. If content is not relevant, then the content is archived and no longer published on the Website. The above mentioned policy in force and will be followed while maintaining the website.

Content Contribution, Moderation and Approval Policy

Content would be contributed by the authorized Content Manager in a consistent fashion to maintain uniformity and to bring in standardization along with associated metadata and keywords. In order to present the content as per the requirement of the viewer, organize the content in categorized manner and to retrieve the relevant content efficiently, the content is contributed to the website through a Content Management System which would be web-based having user-friendly interface. The content on the website goes through the entire life-cycle process of:- Creation, Modification, Approval, Moderation, Publishing, Expiry Once the content is contributed it is approved and moderated prior to being published on the Website. If the content is rejected at any level then it is reverted back to the originator of the content for modification. MOSDAC has prescribed the appropriate Moderator & Approver for each of the content element.

Content Review Policy

All possible efforts need to be taken to keep the content on the Website current and up-to-date. This Content Review Policy defines the roles and responsibilities of the website content review and the manner in which it needs to be carried out. Review Policies are defined for the diverse content elements. The Review Policy is based on different type of content elements, its validity and relevance as well as the archival policy. The entire website content would be reviewed for syntax checks once a month by the MOSDAC Team.

Website Contingency Management Policy

The presence of the website on the Internet and very importantly the site is fully functional all the times. It is expected of the Government websites to deliver information and services on a 24X7 basis. Hence, all efforts should be made to minimize the downtime of the website as far as possible. It is therefore necessary that a proper Contingency Plan to be prepared in handle any eventualities and restore the site in the shortest possible time. The possible contingencies include:

1. Defacement of the website: All possible security measures must be taken for the website to prevent any possible defacement/hacking by unscrupulous elements. However, if despite the security measures in place, such an eventuality occurs, there must be a proper contingency plan, which should immediately come into force. If it has been established beyond doubt that the website has been defaced, the site must be immediately blocked. The contingency plan must clearly indicate as to who is the person authorised to decide on the further course of action in such eventualities. The complete contact details of this authorised person must be available at all times with the web management team. Efforts should be made to restore the original site in the shortest possible time. At the same time, regular security reviews and checks should be conducted in order to plug any loopholes in the security.

2. Data Corruption: A proper mechanism has to be worked out by the concerned in consultation with their web hosting service provider to ensure that appropriate and regular back-ups of the website data are being taken. These enable a fast recovery and uninterrupted availability of the information to the citizens in view of any data corruption.

3. Hardware/Software Crash: Though such an occurrence is a rarely, still in case the server on which the website is being hosted crashes due to some unforeseen reason, the web hosting service provider must have enough redundant infrastructure available to restore the website at the earliest.

4. Natural Disasters: There could be circumstances whereby due to some natural calamity, the entire data center where the website is being hosted gets destroyed or ceases to exist. A well planned contingency mechanism has to be in place for such eventualities whereby is should be ensured that the Hosting Service Provider has a Disaster Recover Centre (DRC) set up at a geographically remote location and the website is switched over to the DRC with minimum delay and restored on the Net.

5 . Apart from the above, in the event of any National Crisis or unforeseen calamity, Government websites are looked upon as a reliable and fast source of information to the public. A well defined contingency plan for all such eventualities must be in place so that the emergency information/contact help-lines could be displayed on the website without any delay. For this, the concerned person in the MOSDAC responsible for publishing such emergency information must be identified and the complete contact details should be available at all times.

Website Monitoring Policy

We have a Website Monitoring Policy in place and the website is monitored periodically to address and fix the quality and compatibility issues around the following parameters:

Performance: Site download time is optimized for a variety of network connections as well as devices. All important pages of the website are tested for this.

Functionality: All modules of the website are tested for their functionality. The interactive components of the site such as, feedback forms are working smoothly.

Broken Links: The website is thoroughly reviewed to rule out the presence of any broken links or errors.

Traffic Analysis: The site traffic is regularly monitored to analyse the usage patterns as well as visitors profile and preferences.

Feedback: Feedback from the visitors is the best way to judge a websites performance and make necessary improvements. A proper mechanism for feedback is in place to carry out the changes and enhancements as suggested by the visitors.

Website Security Policy

Our website contains information which is freely accessible, and may be viewed by any visitor. However, the website maintains a copyright interest in the contents of all of its websites. Except for authorized security investigations and data collection, no attempts will be made to identify individual users. Accumulated data logs will be scheduled for regular deletion. The Website Privacy Policy details our position regarding the use of personal information provided by customers/visitors. Unauthorized attempts to upload information or change information are strictly prohibited, and may be punishable under the Information Technology Act, 2000.

User ID and Password Policy

Access to sensitive or proprietary business information on our websites is limited to users who have been determined to have an appropriate official reason for having access to such data. All registered users who are granted security access will be identified by a user name provided by webmaster. Users who are granted password access to restricted information are prohibited from sharing those passwords with or divulging those passwords to any third parties. User will notify us immediately in the event a User ID or password is lost or stolen or if User believes that a non-authorized individual has discovered the User ID or password. If you have any questions or comments regarding the Website Security Policy, please contact the Web Information Manager.

Terms & Conditions:

This website is designed, developed and maintained by Space Applications Centre, Indian Space Research Organisation, Department of Space, Government of India.

Though all efforts have been made to ensure the accuracy and currency of the content of this website, the same should not be construed as a statement of law or used for any legal purposes.

Under no circumstances the MOSDAC will be liable for any expense, loss or damage including, without limitation, indirect or consequential loss or damage, or any expense, loss or damage whatsoever arising from use, or loss or use, of data, arising out of or in connection with use of this website.

The terms and conditions shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the Indian Laws. Any dispute arising under these terms and conditions shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of India.

This Website provides links to other web pages that are not part of MOSDAC domain, and MOSDAC does not exercise any control over the information on these external links. External links are provided for your convenience and for reasons consistent with objectives of MOSDAC. Once you link to another site, you are subjected to the Terms & Conditions and privacy policy of that new site. MOSDAC does not guarantee the availability of such linked pages at all times. MOSDAC cannot authorize the use of copyright materials contained in the linked websites. Users are advised to request such authorization from the owner of the linked website. MOSDAC does not guarantee that linked websites comply with Indian Government Web Guidelines